Amen, and please be seated.
If you have a Bible, let me invite you to turn this morning to Ephesians chapter two.
Today we consider verses four through seven.
Now, if you were here last week, we likewise did so.
We're actually, if you go back to before Christmas, we're on our fourth reading of verses one through seven, which I believe
Lord willing will be the last before we move on next week.
But we're considering the question which we haven't dealt with at any length.
Why has God done what he's done for his people?
Why?
What motivates God to save sinners from their sins?
What motivates him to bring spiritual life to the spiritually dead?
And so we want to consider this and to catch the whole context, let's pick up the reading in chapter two, verse one.
This is the holy and inspired word of God.
And you were dead in the trespasses and sins in which you once walked following the course of this world, following the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience.
Among whom we all once lived in the passions of our flesh, carrying out the desires of the body and the mind and were by nature children of wrath, like the rest of mankind.
But God, being rich in mercy, because of the great love with which He loved us, even when we were dead in our trespasses.
made us alive together with Christ.
By grace, you have been saved and raised us up with him and seated us with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus.
So that in the coming ages, he might show the immeasurable riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.
Amen, this is the word of the Lord.
May he bless us to us, let's pray.
Our Father in heaven, what we have not give to us, what we know not, teach us what we are not, make of us, and we ask that you would do so through the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
In Jesus' name I pray, amen.
The Apostle says, God has done something spectacular for every Christian.
He has applied to us all the benefits that belong to Christ.
Everything that belongs to Christ has become ours in union with Him.
The way he's been putting it of late is that, well, Jesus died.
And Jesus rose, and Jesus ascended, and Jesus is seated at the right hand of the majesty on high, and you, by God's power at work in you, you have been bound to Christ in His death, resurrection, ascension, and heavenly session.
And so God gave you spiritual life in Jesus, and that life will go on forever.
Maybe you remember in a different context, Jesus talking about this.
When Nicodemus came to him at night, that teacher in Israel wanted to ask Jesus some questions.
And Jesus said to him in John chapter three, Nicodemus, unless you are born again, you cannot see the kingdom of God.
You cannot see the kingdom of heaven.
And Nicodemus was confused.
He responded with questions.
What do you mean?
How can a man be born again?
Are you saying I have to go back into my mother's womb?
I'm an old man.
And of course Jesus wasn't saying that.
But Jesus was saying you need to not only be born of the flesh into this world, but you need to be born of the Holy Spirit.
into the spiritual reality of the kingdom of heaven.
And unless you are born from above, born by the spirit of God, you cannot even see the kingdom of heaven, he says.
Unless the spirit gives you life, unless the spirit unites you to Jesus, you don't even have the ability to see and appreciate the kingdom of heaven.
Even when the king of heaven is standing in your midst,
It's not that you see and then you get the Holy Spirit and then you get life in Christ.
It's that God gives you the spirit and life in Christ and you have eyes to see and appreciate him.
So that new birth isn't something we do.
We don't command people to be born again.
That's not what Jesus is saying.
He's telling you it's something only God can do for you, but it must happen by God, by his spirit.
to give you new life.
And that's the life he's talking about here.
God made you, he says, alive together with Christ.
And this work of giving you life in Christ is powerful.
How powerful is it?
Well, it's like the mighty power of God, which he exerted at the beginning of creation when he spoke the universe,
into existence.
When in darkness, he said, be light.
And there was light.
That's the way the apostle will put it in 2 Corinthians 4.
God who said, let light shine out of darkness.
God has shown in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
And he made us a new creation.
It's like that mighty power that God exercised on that third day when he raised Christ.
from death in the tomb.
God has raised you in Him to newness of life.
And we mentioned these things before we get to why did God do this, which is the point of today's sermon.
But we mentioned these things in part because we need to know, as Christians, we need to know and understand and remember what God has done for us and why?
Because we are always tempted.
to think that God hasn't really shown up for us.
We're always tempted to say, well, God, what have you done for me lately?
We're always tempted to think that God hasn't really done much for us at all.
Let me apostle Paul says, do you not remember that He made you alive together with Christ?
He raised you
He seated you with Christ in the heavenly places and you are secure in Him for all eternity.
But we're always forgetting that He found us helpless, that He found us needy, that He found us incapable in ourselves to rescue ourselves.
We're always forgetting that He found us dead in our trespasses and sins.
that he found us disobedient to his law, disrespectful to his person, enslaved to the world and the flesh and the devil, and doomed under the wrath of God justly due to us.
And he redeemed us.
He redeemed us by the blood of Christ.
He forgave us all our trespasses and sins, and he
made us alive together with Christ.
Now why did God do that for His people?
Why did He do that for you, for me?
When the Apostle Paul tells us in four words, because of His mercy, because of His love, because of His grace, and because of His kindness.
Let's think about these four things together.
Why did God make you alive in Christ?
So Christian, because
First, because of his rich mercy, verse four, but God being rich in mercy.
Because of the great love with which he loved us, even when we were dead in our trespasses, he made us alive with Christ.
It was the Apostle Paul is saying, not God's duty to save us.
He would be perfectly just if he never saved anybody.
That is to say, he would remain in himself perfectly righteous, perfectly good, perfectly fair, perfectly just.
If he left every last one of us dead in our trespasses and sins, dead in our disobedience, and dead under his just condemnation, but he hasn't done so.
He's rich in mercy.
The story is told.
You never know about these things from history.
That under Napoleon, a mother approached him seeking a pardon for her son.
The emperor replied that the young man had committed a certain offense twice and justice demanded his death.
But I don't ask for justice, the mother explained.
I plead for mercy, but your son does not deserve mercy.
Napoleon replied, sir, the woman cried.
It would not be mercy if he deserved it.
And mercy is all I ask for.
Well then, the emperor said, I will have mercy and he spared her son.
Don't give me justice is what Christians say to God.
Don't give me what I deserve.
Don't be fair to me.
in accordance with my rebellions.
But oh Lord, have mercy on me a sinner.
And God does enrich mercy, abundant mercy, he says.
He has all the resources of mercy necessary to look on our miserable condition and show us pity and show us compassion, to step into our helplessness and exchange our
sins for the gift of Christ's righteousness and to exchange our spiritual death for new life in Christ.
What prompts God to act like this?
It's not something in me.
It's not something in you, but something in him.
It's not on account of any merit in ourselves, but on account of rich mercy in him.
That's the first thing.
Why else did God make us alive in Christ because of his great love?
Notice that language.
Again, verse 4, but God being rich in mercy because of the great love with which he loved us even when we were dead and our trespasses made us alive together with Christ.
It's not that mercy caused him to love you.
It is that his love for you caused him to be merciful to you.
The Apostle Paul is reminding us, as he did in chapter 1, that this is his choice, that his choice is love, that the love of God sent the Son of God to bear the wrath of God for the people of God to apply the life of Christ to us.
C.S.
Lewis described this love by saying, God who needs nothing, loves into existence holy superfluous creatures,
in order that he may love and perfect them.
He creates the universe already foreseeing, or should we say, says Louis, seeing, there are no tenses in God, already seeing the buzzing cloud of flies about the cross, the flayed back pressed against the uneven stake, the nails driven through the nerves, the repeated torture of back and arms as time after time for breaths sake.
pitched up here in his love.
This is the diagram of love himself, the inventor of all loves.
God loved us in spite of our unloveliness, not because of our loveliness.
There's a movie, The Fisher King, Amanda Plummer plays this real klutzy, mousy wallflower.
She has no friends.
She's in a terrible job.
She's down and out and depressed.
And Robin Williams, the character who plays the character, he takes her out.
And at the end of the day, he wants to keep talking with her.
But she basically says to him, you know, no, because if you've got to know me, you won't like me.
I'm tired of rejection.
It was nice to go out, but everybody who gets to know me doesn't like me.
So thanks.
And Robin Williams says, I do know you.
I know that you think you're awkward.
I know that you think you're clumsy.
I know that you are awkward and clumsy.
And I know that you hate your job and I know that you don't have many friends and you don't feel as wonderful as everybody else.
But I want you to know that I know who you are and I love you.
And I will never leave you.
And I will never forsake you."
And she looks at him as if she's looking to the heart of somebody she thought was, you know, bound to be her enemy.
And she sees his understanding and his love.
And she says, are you real?
Are you for real?
It's a miracle that you would love me.
Well, yes, in fact it is.
It's a miracle of gracious, generous love.
God loved us, friends, not because He found us lovely.
He knew everything about us as the apostle described, dead in our trespasses, spiritually bankrupt, walking contrary to His revealed will.
Disinterested in honoring Him in the least, and He loved us while yet we were sinners.
and he redeemed us from our unloveliness because of his great love.
And he gave us life in union with Christ because he loved us and determined that we would know his saving love.
Don't you in your heart of hearts, yearn to be loved with this kind of unmerited, unearned love that's knowledgeable about every secret of your heart
She was once America's most famous atheist, Madeline Murray O'Hare, and after she disappeared, turned out she was kidnapped and murdered, but she was gone for quite some time, and her diaries were sold off in order to pay her back taxes, and in her diary, six times, she wrote, somebody, somewhere, love me.
I don't know her.
I wonder if she perceived though, like so many of us do, that the love of those around her was only conditioned upon her good performance.
I say that because she lamented elsewhere, I have failed in marriage.
I have failed in motherhood.
I have failed as a politician.
One wonders if she put these things together like so many do, be good, be successful, and you will be loved.
Fail, and no one will love you."
And the apostle Paul says, we have something much better than that.
For we have failed at love, failed at life, failed at living in the light of God's truth, and yet he loved us with his great love, and this is the best
kind of love that there is and it brings steady assurance to those who are convinced of it.
Being loved with this kind of love when he knows everything about us.
He sees every blot and stain and wrinkle.
He knows every unlovely thing and yet he chooses to love us.
That brings a steady assurance for when our hearts condemn us.
when our lives testify against us, when the world tells us we're nothing, when the devil says we're worse than nothing.
I mean, think how insecure you would be if you think something in you provoked him to love you.
I mean, if that's true, how do you know that something in you discovered tomorrow wouldn't provoke him to quit loving you?
But our assurance rests in this that he loves.
He loves the unlovely because he chooses to love and his love is a rock, a fortress, a high tower to protect us and defend us when all the forces of evil are right against us.
But all the ground around us gives way.
This is where we can find steady assurance of the steadfast love of the Lord.
It's found in Christ.
Being made alive together with Christ, we know that he's done it because he's rich in mercy and because of his great love.
And thirdly, because of his immeasurable grace.
Notice that language he made us alive together with Christ.
Verse 6, by grace you have been saved and he raised us up with him and seated us with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus.
So that in the coming ages,
He might show the immeasurable riches of His grace and kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.
Now this is vintage Paul.
The Paul here can't help but interrupt himself.
I mean, his train of thought is verse four moving forward, that God made us alive together with Christ.
God raised us up together with Christ.
God seated us in the heavenly places with Christ.
But all you can get out is that God made us alive together with Christ, and He has to interject.
That's why your text probably has a hyphen.
By grace you have been saved.
And then in verse 70 speaks of this immeasurable riches of His grace, and we'll see at verse 8, He'll repeat Himself, for by grace you have been saved.
And grace is more than just unmerited favor.
more than getting what you don't deserve.
It is unmerited favor in the face of what you do deserve.
It is being given heaven when you deserve hell.
What do you deserve for your trespasses and sins?
You deserve God's just evaluation.
God's just condemnation.
What do you get, by grace?
You get pardoned for sin.
peace with God and eternal and everlasting life in Christ.
How immeasurable are the riches of this grace.
It surpasses all expectation.
That's really what he's saying here.
It goes beyond what we can imagine.
The term immeasurable here means it exceeds a fixed mark.
It overshoots a goal.
It rises above comparison.
His grace to us is immeasurably rich.
And by this grace you have been saved, he says.
Not by works that no one can boast, right?
Not by works that anyone should boast in themselves.
Not by works that anyone could claim.
Well, it's because of me.
It's because of what I did or what I said or how I performed
What I believe, no, you could do nothing to save yourself, dear Christian.
When Christ came for you and he lived for you and he died for you and he rose and he ascended and is seated for you, you didn't contribute anything to his finished work.
You boasted him and then God sent his spirit to unite you to him.
so that everything he has becomes yours.
And all your sin has become his upon the cross.
That's immeasurable grace.
Why else, finally, because of God's kindness?
Did you see that in verse seven?
So in the coming ages, you might show that you're measurable, riches of his grace and kindness toward us.
What's God's intention here with all of his mercy and his love and his grace?
What's he aiming at when he makes you alive and seats you with Christ in the heavenly places?
It is so that, or in order that, verse 7, it's a purpose statement.
God's purpose is that in the coming ages, for eternity forward, he might show or demonstrate or put on display via measurable riches of his grace and kindness to you.
God plans to put it on display so convincingly that no one can deny it.
He demonstrates the riches of His grace by taking the wicked and making them trophies of grace.
Grace here is no mere feeling on God's part.
It's no mere disposition on His part.
But He worked in a way that was useful to you.
That's the meaning of the word kindness, actually.
I mean, when the Apostle Paul famously in 1 Corinthians 13 says, love is, well, first love is patient.
We're long suffering.
Love puts up with a whole mess of things.
He secondly says not only love is patient, but love is kind.
And what he means is that it moves outward to actually do good in a way that's useful.
and helpful to another.
And that's what God has done.
He has been the Apostle reminds you better to you than you think.
He has done more for you than you understand.
And God is going to manifest His own glory, the glory of His grace for all eternity in you a trophy of that grace, a patient
after a successful surgery is a living testimony to his surgeon's skill and the grace of God.
Let's admit it, but the surgeon has done the work and you have lived and it testifies a priceless artwork testifies to the artist's skill.
How will the universe know?
The character of our God, the fullness of the character of our God and his generosity
to the undeserving and his mercy to the helpless and his love to the unlovely and his grace to those who deserve wrath.
You, that's how they'll know.
By his grace to you, John Stott tells the story of one of his professors when he was at Cambridge who was honored in his retirement by his colleagues
the board, and they commissioned a beautiful portrait of this professor, and the likeness would then hang in a hall as a reminder of this man who had taught there most of his life.
And when Dr. Gibson, this professor, was giving his words of thanks and appreciation at the unveiling of the beautiful portrait, he said this in the future,
When people see this painting, they will ask the question, not, who is that man?
But who painted that portrait?
It was a way for him of expressing his appreciation at the artistic skill of the portrait maker.
That's a picture, though, of what God is doing.
You know, God's grace has been manifested to us, not so that we could become the center of attention
Not so that we ultimately, well, people will walk around and have been saying, well, who is that man?
Who is that woman?
What about that man?
Or what about that woman?
But no, they'll say, who did that work of grace in him?
Who did that work of grace in her?
Who saved that man?
Who saved that woman?
We are his workmanship.
created in Christ Jesus and for the display of God's grace.
So because of his rich mercy and his great love and his immeasurable grace and kindness to us in Christ Jesus, he has made us alive in Christ Jesus and that is what this table before us is all about.
On the night in which he was betrayed,
just hours before his crucifixion, he gathered his disciples for one last supper.
And he said to them, I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer.
And they didn't understand.
They didn't understand yet that he was going to be the true Passover lamb who takes away their sin, that he was going to suffer in himself what their sins truly deserve.
But Jesus knew
And Jesus knew them.
Oh, just think of them for a moment.
And he didn't say all of what I'm about to say.
We don't know the way in which his thoughts ran, but you can imagine it for a moment, can't you?
Jesus sitting with them at supper and thinking, I know who you are.
I know what you are like.
I know you, Thomas.
I know you're gonna doubt my resurrection, though I told you I would rise.
I know you're going to doubt my promises to rise and I know that you're not going to believe any of these other men with whom we have spent three years together when they tell you I rose until you can touch my hands and my side after my resurrection.
I know you doubting Thomas and I know you Matthew.
I know who I chose by that seashore when I called it a tax collector to be mine.
I know all your notorious tax collecting friends and the other sinners, the prostitutes, the wicked that you brought to that party to celebrate that I called you.
But I knew who you are.
I know you, Peter.
I know you always speak without thinking.
You have in mind the things of Satan, not the things of God.
You're going to deny me to my face three times before I'm crucified, Peter.
He'll tell him.
He's going to do that.
And I know you, all of you men, I know you're about to dispute with one another as they did about which of them is the greatest.
I know that you're all going to fall asleep in the garden when I take you there and ask you to remain awake while I pray.
I know you'll all scatter away from me when they come to arrest me.
I know your courage will fail.
And I'll have to confine you behind a locked door after my resurrection, because you think I'm still dead and buried, and you're worried about what trouble might come.
I know all of this about all of you and worse, and I have eagerly desired to eat this meal with you.
for I will give my body and my blood for your sins.
Your salvation will be built not on the strength of your love and faithfulness to me.
Your salvation will be built on the strength of my love and faithfulness to you.
One day you'll eat this Passover and one day my people will continue to eat this Passover meal in remembrance of me.
and the bread and the wine will speak to you that I loved you.
And I gave myself for you eagerly and you will eat and drink bread and wine because I
will eat the bread of affliction.
And I will drink the cup of God's wrath because of my mercy, my love, and my grits, and my kindness toward you.
What other rock can hold you?
but the rock who is Christ.
Oh, put your hopes in him.
Let's pray.
Father, heaven, thank you that the steadfast love of the Lord never ceases.
And we ask by your spirit that we would know how wide and long and high and deep is the love of Christ.
We ask that you would feed us, nourish us, strengthen us in His love.
In Jesus' name I pray.
Amen.
Let's stand together and sing.